ARCHIVE OF THE FUTURE: ALAN MOORE’S WATCHMEN AS
HISTORIOGRAPHIC NOVEL1
TONY VENEZIA
The fact is that every writer creates his own precursors.
His work modifies our conception of the past, as it will
modify the future.
Jorge Luis Borges (‗Kafka and His Precursors‘ 236)
Archives are everywhere in the contemporary graphic
novel, although almost inevitably not the ordered
collections of the academic library or a law firm‘s
records. These are archives in the loosest, messiest
sense of the word — archives of the forgotten artefacts
and the ephemera of American popular culture, items
that were never meant to be collected.
Jared Gardner (‗Archives, Collectors, and the New
Media‘ 787)
Figure 1: Watchmen, Alan Moore and Dave Gibbons, chapter XII: page
32 (excerpt). © DC Comics.1

An earlier version of this essay was given as a paper at the ‗Work in Progress‘
conference, Birkbeck, in 2008.
PEER ENGLISH
17
The final panel frame from Watchmen, the graphic novel of faded
superheroes by writer Alan Moore and artist Dave Gibbons (figure 1),
shows a pile of papers, documents and envelopes with a journal
prominently displayed. This suggests an appropriate visual index of an
archive: scattered documents that demand to be sorted, arranged, and
catalogued. Moore is perhaps the best known writer in the comics
medium and, as Sean Carney has argued, questions of history and
historiography permeate his work: ‗If there is a single thematic concern
that ties Moore‘s work together into a coherent oeuvre it is the recurring
question of history‘ (para. 2).2 The archive as narrative is therefore an
important paradigm in considering Moore‘s work in general and, as I
hope to show, Watchmen in particular, a narrative suffused with history
thematically, formally and materially. Jared Gardner in a recent essay
proposed that archives and archival narratives saturate contemporary
comics. Gardner‘s approach draws from Walter Benjamin in examining
how fragments of the past intrude on to the present, and he proposes that
comics are uniquely capable of composing archival narratives not just by
making use of patterns of verbal–visual representations, but by
inscribing the subculture of comics fans and collectors within their
narrative structures:
[T]he comic form is ideally suited to carrying on the
vital work Benjamin called for generations earlier:
making the present aware of its own ‗archive‘, the past
that it is always in the process of becoming.
(Gardner.803)
Gardner focuses on alternative comics, but points to Moore‘s From Hell
as example of an archival text, ‗an extended and profoundly complicated
archival search for the ―truth‖ about Jack the Ripper and his victims‘
framed by an extensive appendix (804, n.1). Gardner is not alone in
reading comics through the lens of Benjamin‘s writings on history,
historiography, and cultural production. Alvaro Alemán has examined
the link between urban experience and perceptual configuration in
comics, while others have been drawn to analyses of memory (see
Beeck, Prager). I propose to extend this approach to read Watchmen as
an archive of comics history, a historiographic novel, one that refutes
postmodern ahistoricism. An exhaustive reading of such a densely
referential text would prove difficult, if not impossible, considering the
limited space. As such, this reading will resemble the fragmentary
quality of the archive with a necessarily selective focus. I will start by
looking at the content and form of the narrative generally, before moving 
PEER ENGLISH
18
on to read selected extracts and considering their relevance to the
archival structure of Watchmen.
Plot and Masterplot
Watchmen is sometimes referred to as a ‗deconstruction‘ of superhero
comics, signalling the text‘s simultaneous closeness to and distance from
the mass cultural processes that produced it (Reynolds 30, Thomson
111). It is a superhero narrative that appears to critically parody and
undermine prior superhero narratives, in particular the implicit
ideological contradictions of the genre, commonly allegorised as a
dialectic of the authoritarian and the utopian, a duality figured in the
doubled identities of superheroes as crime–fighting vigilantes and
everyday observers. As Reynolds has noted, superhero comics are ‗a
popular art–form traditionally known for its apparently hegemonic and
sometimes overtly authoritarian texts‘(7). Watchmen is a historiographic
narrative, archiving its own historical imaginary in an attempt to master
and re–write the past that has produced it.
A brief explication is necessary and appropriate. The narrative
begins with the murder of Edward Blake, an aging masked crime–fighter
known as The Comedian, evidently thrown from the window of his New
York high rise apartment. The setting is a recognisably different
contemporary world, one in which crime–fighting superheroes exist and
their presence has altered history resulting in a fourth term for Nixon
following America‘s victory in Vietnam. Blake‘s murder is investigated
by Rorschach, real name Walter Kovacs, who concludes that the murder
is part of a vendetta against ‗masks‘. Rorschach brings his suspicions to
his old acquaintances: Dan Dreiberg (Nite Owl), a wealthy ornithologist;
Adrian Veidt (Ozymandias), a billionaire industrialist; Laurie Juspeczyk
(Silk Spectre), who is the girlfriend of Jon Osterman (Dr. Manhattan) the
only ‗real‘ superhero, a nuclear physicist who gained extrahuman
capabilities following an accident at an atomic plant. The Comedian had
belonged to an older generation of vigilantes dating back to World War
II, the Minutemen, a group who included Laurie‘s mother — the original
Silk Spectre, who forced her unwilling daughter to take on her role —
and Hollis Mason, who preceded Dreiberg as Nite Owl. Public pressure
led to legislation proscribing the activities of vigilantes, forcing them to
retire (Dreiberg), go underground (Rorschach), or work directly for the
government (Blake and Manhattan — in the latter‘s case as a literal
nuclear deterrent). No–one takes Rorschach seriously, considering him
paranoid, but events occur that give credence to his claims. Dr. 
PEER ENGLISH
19
Manhattan is accused of unwittingly causing close colleagues to develop
cancer and is forced into exile, leading to an escalation of the Cold War;
Veidt is targeted by an assassination attempt; Rorschach is framed for
the murder of an old antagonist and imprisoned. Dan and Laurie break
him out prison, and discover that the apparent plot against ‗masks‘ itself
obscures a masterplot involving the staging of a large–scale atrocity that
will result in the mass murder of innocents, in order to frighten the
nations of the world into unity and peace. Veidt is unmasked as the
grand conspirator, the attempt on his life an act of misdirection to
conceal his masterplot to save the world from what he sees as inevitable
nuclear conflict: ‗I saved earth from hell. Next I‘ll help her towards
utopia‘ (XII:20). The other characters agree to keep silent for the sake of
the new world order, except for Rorschach who is killed by Manhattan to
prevent the revelation of the conspiracy. Unbeknown to the other
characters, Rorschach has mailed his journal, in which he has detailed
Veidt‘s subterfuge, to a libertarian newspaper. The narrative ends with
his journal about to be picked up and opened.
Such a compressed explication does not do justice to the sheer
density of the narrative, which is constructed and complicated by a
variety of means. Watchmen is composed of numerous textual elements
that foreground the archive, most notably the use of prose insertions that
complete each chapter. These supplements from autobiographies, diaries,
interviews, news reports, psychiatric reviews, marketing statements and
scrapbooks are themselves metonyms for the archive. Watchmen resists
the depthless postmodern play of signifiers by incorporating historical
referents into the archival narrative: Richard Nixon, the Vietnam War,
and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan all feature in the text. The
shadow of the Cold War hangs over the text, that period of permanent
confrontation between the USA and the USSR when the imminent threat
of nuclear conflagration was a real possibility. As historian Eric
Hobsawm has commented, ‗it did not happen, but for some forty years it
looked like a daily possibility‘(226).
In Watchmen the publication of the first Superman comic in 1938
inspires masked vigilantes to take to the streets to fight crime thereby
revealing the ideology of superheroes to be, in Althusserian terms,
imaginary solutions to real contradictions. The representation of history
is achieved via the reflexive referencing of prior histories of
representation in the spirit of what Benjamin called ‗materialist
historiography‘, of seizing on the fragment of the past as ‗an image
which flashes up at the instant when it can be recognised‘ (‗Theses‘ 247–
48). These constellated historical fragments constitute the archive as an
epistemological model, one that resembles Fredric Jameson‘s hypothesis 
PEER ENGLISH
20
of the cognitive map, ‗the mental map of city space…extrapolated to that
mental map of the social and global totality‘ (‗Cognitive
Mapping‘.282).3 Comics‘ spatialization of time make them an ideal form
to attempt to realise this mapping. Historically seen as disposable
objects, Alemán argues that a side–effect of the image–text dialectic in
mass–produced comics is a ‗mapping of social reality‘ (para. 6). The
archival comic provides us with a potential model of cognitive mapping
and its degraded corollary, the conspiracy, cartographically realised
across the grid of the comics page as a kind of spatial abstraction of an
unrealisable/totality.
Fragment and Flux
Reading comics is an inferential process of construing a narrative flux
out of the fragmented panels that constitute the comics page. Scott
McCloud defines this phenomenological process of completion as
‗closure‘: ‗observing the parts but perceiving the whole‘ (63). The reader
plays a collaborative part in bridging the gap between panels by
interpreting the separate moments as continuous and unified. By way of
illustration let us turn to the famous opening page of Watchmen
(figure.2). The page has a kind of cinematic grace, starting with a close–
up and pulling further out panel–by–panel to widen the perspective. This
gradual momentum utilises what McCloud calls a moment–to–moment
transition (71), moving from the close–up of blood in the gutter,
gradually tracking back to reveal the street from an increasingly panoptic
perspective, the vertiginous scale emphasised by the widescreen panel at
the bottom of the page.4 Closure also occurs on a semantic level in the
association of word and image; the verbal narration paralleling the visual
sequence, operating as a dialectical montage of image and text.
Rorschach‘s journal is a recursive intradiegetic text, its yellowed, torn
pages indicating a fragmentary textual materiality that is part of the
larger totality of the narrative.
Gardner contends that the verbal/visual dialectic of comics make
them the ideal form to represent the interpenetration of past and present,
the culmination of Benjamin‘s call, in his essay ‗The Author as
Producer‘, for writers to develop a new language to record this process.
Benjamin called on writers to pick up the camera to break the barrier
between image and text: ‗without knowing its name, the writing
Benjamin was calling for in the 1930s is clearly the comic‘
(Gardnerl789).
PEER ENGLISH
21
Figure 2: Rorschach‘s journal, I: 11. © DC Comics.
Returning to the opening page, the verbal and visual elements
appear to be running on different tracks, thus frustrating closure. Image
and text occupy the same figurative space , but it is unclear as to whether
they are occurring in the same diegetic time. Closure in McCloud‘s sense
of the term is actually deferred: for instance it is only later (and on re–
reading) that the reader learns that the man carrying the placard
announcing ‗THE END IS NIGH‘ (itself a proleptic sign) is
actually.Rorschach.
This temporal and spatial dis–juxtaposition is developed further 
PEER ENGLISH
22
over the next few pages, in which two police detectives‘ piece together
what happened to Blake as they wander round his apartment. The past
and present collide as we read the detectives‘ verbal reconstruction of
Blake‘s murder spliced over a visual enactment (I: 2–3: ‗Somebody
really had it in for this guy‘). Alemán notes that comics process what
Benjamin called the ‗shock of the urban experience‘, operating as
‗textual instructions for the recomposition of public space‘ (para. 4).5
This reconstitution also has a temporal element. "http://this_is_a_url" The best example of
chronotopic recombination is Manhattan‘s unique temporal perception
whereby he experiences time as a constant, able to step in and out of the
past, present or future. Holding a photograph of himself, he also
experiences the moment of its taking years before (IV:1), perfectly
encapsulating the spatio–temporal capability of comics to configure
simultaneity and totality.6
Blake‘s murder initiates the narrative of Watchmen, his body
providing an absent presence, a gap that requires closure. Rorschach
commits himself to solving the murder, his clothing signifying his status;
the fedora and raincoat of the hardboiled private detective, supplemented
by his mask, an ever–changing emblem that both disguises him and
gives him his name (see figure 3). His journal is a parody of the gruff
monologue of the private eye, and reveals him to be a morally
uncompromising, disturbed individual: in other words, just the kind of
person who would disguise himself to fight criminals. There is a dual
motion to crime narratives, as the detective moves backward to uncover
past events even as they move forward to a conclusion. Typically this
strategy of double–movement is ideological as disruption is followed by
recovery leading to reinstatement of order (Scaggs 46–7). The detective
resembles the archivist recovering fragments of the past to constitute a
coherent narrative, to bring closure on the level of content. Rorschach
pieces together the plot that leads to and beyond Blake‘s murder, and his
investigation opens up the generic archive inscribed within the narrative.
The superhero genre is a hybrid of crime fiction with its emphasis on
recovery, and science fiction with its accent on projection. Superheroes
were thrust onto the world in the 1930s, effectively by a remediation of
two main sources: comic strips from newspaper supplements that had
been popular since the end of the nineteenth century, and the spectacular
if formulaic narratives of pulp magazines (see Sabin 144–49).
7 As
Franco Moretti argues, genres are ‗temporary structures…arrangements
that last in time… Janus–like creatures, with one face turned toward
history and the other to form‘ (14). In other words, genres are not fixed
or unchanging categories, but historically contingent formations that
process and are processed by history. Watchmen presents an alternative 
PEER ENGLISH
23
history, retroactively enacting projection, constructing an archive of the
future. Alternative histories, a sub–genre of science fiction, narrativise
moments of divergence from recorded history and the consequences of
that divergence (Duncan 209).
Manhattan‘s existence is crucial to the diegetic world as he
represents a point of divergence. The only ‗real‘ superhuman, he is
capable of manipulating matter at an atomic level and his appearance
renders the superpowerless masked vigilantes superfluous. He is an
embodiment of the science fiction trope Darko Suvin identifies as the
novum, the new thing, a fictional component that dramatically alters its
environment (63). "://this_is_not_a_url" Manhattan‘s presence ensures that America wins the
Vietnam conflict, that the US has the edge over the Soviet Union in the
Cold War and that Nixon is able to change the Constitution and stay on
for a fourth term. As a symbolic form, alternative histories articulate
Benjamin‘s vision of seizing ‗hold of a memory as it flashes up at a
moment of danger‘ (‗Theses‘ 243). In doing so, such narratives
problematise teleological readings of history that would confer
inevitability and linearity, embodying Benjamin‘s concept of materialist
historiography as they ‗wrest tradition away from a conformism that is
about to overpower it‘ (‗Theses‘ 243).
Figure 3: ‗Who watches the watchmen?‘ I: 9. © DC Comics.
Under the Hood
Rorschach is eventually shuffled into the text, subjected to textual
reframing in the form of a psychiatric report. This is one of many prose
inserts that fill out the narrative and act as material supplements, what
Reynolds refers to as the ‗multi–textual‘ apparatus of the story (109).
These effectively act to provide the text with its own context, 
PEER ENGLISH
24
contributing to the archive of this alternative history, performing a
double role in acting as commentary on both the fictionalised alternative
history as well as the actual historical background of the material text.
They function as annotations to comics as history, materially embodying
the archival qualities of the narrative. One prominent supplement is the
autobiography of Hollis Mason, who recounts how the publication of the
first Superman comic in 1938 sparked a craze for masked vigilantes
around America (see figure 4). Pulp fiction and superhero comics
provide simplistic imaginary models for dealing with complex social
conditions. Mason initially becomes a policeman to confront as he puts
it, ‗the pimps, the prostitutes, the protection artists‘. Inspired by reports
Figure 4: Hollis Mason‘s autobiography, Under the Hood, I: n.pag. ©
DC Comics.
PEER ENGLISH
25
of people emulating those comics‘ heroes, he develops the masked
persona of Nite Owl. The period from the 1930s to the 1950s is
commonly referred to as the Golden Age of comics (Klock 2), and in the
context of Mason‘s memoir this seems ironic, as the world of primary
coloured morality is also the world of pimps, prostitutes and protection
artists. Mason says he preferred the superhero comics to the pulps
because comics dispensed with ‗darkness and ambiguity‘. Watchmen
reinstates that darkness and ambiguity by materially incorporating these
pulp elements into the narrative structure, returning superheroes ‗to their
pulp roots‘ (Klock 76).
In the world of Watchmen, masked vigilantes have their own fans,
and Mason passes on his secret identity to a younger admirer, Dan
Dreiberg. Both men are plainly fanboys, their fetish for collection
transferred from comics to vintage cars and ornithology. The transition
of Nite Owl from Mason to Dreiberg works as a symbolic transition
from Golden Age to Silver Age in comics history, the latter period
associated with Marvel characters in the sixties such as Spiderman who
tended to adopt an ironic tone in the midst of existential crises: ‗this
second wave of superheroes was as different from the first as the first
wave was from the pulps‘ (Klock 2). This transfer breaks with the typical
comics practice of static historicity, or of what Umberto Eco writing on
Superman called an ‗immobile present‘, the cyclic temporal continuity of
superhero stories in which characters never seem to age (116).
Watchmen‘s continuity fractures the static time of superheroes allowing
historical time to enter the narrative. Paradoxically, by being published
as a contained rather than continuous serial the text is opened out rather
than constricted. Superhero narratives are predicated on serialisation,
which often results in what Jason Dittmer defines as ‗the tyranny of
the serial‘, the narrative stasis that ensues as a comic remains bound by
continuity ensuring a fundamental conservatism across most superhero
narratives:
The tyranny of the serial becomes useful as an
explanatory tool when one considers why the Superman
of the comic books did not become Nietzsche‘s Super–
man. In other words, why would a super–powered
human, emotionally tied to humanity yet with liberating
potential concealed within, not attempt to revolutionize
society? In the Nietzschean perspective, the
Übermenschen are supposed to return to humanity and
bring their knowledge and skills to bear on humanity‘s
condition. Instead, in the comic world superheroes are 
PEER ENGLISH
26
more like super–powered policemen than anything
else.— their support for the status quo is what defines
them, and any attempt to fundamentally alter the social
system is what marks the character as a villain. It is in
the absence of the super–man that the tyranny of the
serial can be perceived. (Dittmer 253)
Dittmer proposes that Moore and Gibbon‘s Watchmen resists this, first
by characterising Vedit as ‗a perfect representation of the Nietzschean
Übermensch‘ (254), then by–passing the tyranny of the serial that
‗privileges plots that re–constitute the status quo‘ (256). Initially, Moore
and Gibbons were to have worked on a revival of characters of Charlton
comics from the sixties for DC, who bought the copyright (Khoury et al
9–10). When DC decided on other plans for the characters, Moore
created new ones inspired by Charlton‘s superheroes. But the Charlton
heroes were anyway adaptations of more established characters, Blue
Beetle for instance is a fairly obvious version of Batman (transmuted in
Watchmen into Nite Owl). The characters in Watchmen are therefore
copies of copies, but it is this reified archetypal status that allows for a
critical revision otherwise restricted by the demands of continuity.
Watchmen was serialised without pages given over to letters,
adverts or editorials, as is customary, further allowing Moore and
Gibbons to exploit textual materiality by the inclusion of the narrative
supplements used to comment on the diegesis. This is made evident in
another of the supplements, one of Veidt‘s company memos in which he
discusses the marketing of action figures of himself and his former
colleagues. Veidt suggests marketing terrorist figures for a children‘s
cartoon, a blunt comment on crass merchandising that illustrates the
contradictory anxiety felt about mass culture by a product of mass
culture itself (X: n.pag.). The ideological ramifications are further
illustrated in another insert which advertises ‗the Veidt method‘, which
resembles the Charles Atlas self–improvement adverts prominently
displayed in comics of the Golden and Silver Ages: ‗If you‘re reading
this, it‘s because you sent away for my course, and if you did THAT, it‘s
because you think you need a change in your life.… The Vedit method is
designed to produce bright and capable young men and women who will
be fit to inherit the challenging, promising, and often difficult world that
awaits our future‘ (X: n. pag.). Given the consequences of Veidt‘s plan,
the sinister irony is unmissable: consumerism is deeply implicated with
the authoritarian.
PEER ENGLISH
27
Seduction of the Innocent
This contradictory anxiety felt in the text about the manipulative
ideological functions of comics as products of mass culture is
complicated by the inclusion of a substantive allusion to a notorious
episode in comics history that emerges re–written within the narrative.
Watchmen‘s archive acts as host to what Klock refers to as ‗broken‘
traditions (68). These counter–traditions signify moments of possible
divergence, the past flashing up as an instant. One such tradition is the
horror comic, directly referenced in the Watchmen. Tales of the Black
Freighter is the title of a comic that a minor character reads throughout,
scenes from which are spliced into the main narrative. Once again,
verbal and visual elements are dis–juxtaposed, as images and text from
diegetic and intradiegetic text overlap and become misaligned (see figure
5). The content features a man shipwrecked by pirates who races to save
his family from destruction, but who in his obsession becomes the very
instrument for that destruction. Word and image are disassembled and
recast, illuminating a wider network of connections, associations and
allusions. The supplement for chapter V documents a counter–history of
comics in a fictional cultural history, Treasure Island Treasury of
Comics (V: n.pag.). This rewrites actual cultural history as horror comics
inspired a moral panic in the 1950s, exemplified by psychiatrist Fredric
Wertham‘s book Seduction of the Innocent, which led directly to
industry self–censorship (Sabin 157–62, Nyberg). This comic–within–a–
comic closely resembles the E.C. comics that inspired much of the
backlash. In a world with superheroes there is no need for superhero
comics, and much as horror comics shadowed the superhero genre, the
story in Tales of the Black Freighter shadows Veidt‘s masterplot.
Figure 5: Reading Tales of the Black Freighter III: 2. © DC Comics.
PEER ENGLISH
28
Historically, pornographic comics, commonly called ‗Tijuana
Bibles‘, represent another ‗broken‘ tradition. These illegal, under–the–
counter comics used images of copyrighted comic characters or
celebrities, and were popular from the 1930s to the 1950s. They were a
counter–tradition that ran alongside the Golden Age superheroes and by
recontextualising copyrighted characters they anticipated pop art and the
underground comix of the 60s, as well Watchmen‘s own narrative tactics
(Sabin 142–43). Sally Juspeczyk keeps a copy of one that uses her image
as a souvenir, and the half–concealed image is woven collage–like into
the main text. Klock writes: ‗Watchmen invokes its own history as a
superhero narrative, but also makes reference to a host of apocryphal
comic literature‘ (68–69).
Conclusion: Fearful Symmetry
Watchmen is a text about other texts, composed of other texts that
constitute the plot, a comic about other comics and the cultural history
that they carry. This archival narrative foregrounds its textual
materiality, and as the last panel shows gestures toward its own
processes of construction in the constellations of fragments that
constitute the narrative flux. Watchmen embodies and emplots an
attempt to negotiate some kind of cognitive mapping in its intricate form,
even as it lapses into the debased content of the conspiracy. Carney
argues that Moore‘s writing critiques postmodernism from within:
‗Moore is emblematic of the artistic strategies which Jameson envisions
for postmodern art, which can respond to the cultural logic of late
capitalism not by rejecting its symptoms, but by embracing them and
using them against that cultural logic‘ (para. 21). At times Watchmen‘s
critique of the hegemony of superhero comics resembles Wertham‘s
diatribe against the medium and its deleterious effects. Yet the text also
clearly embraces the sensual and bracing experience of the comics form.
Such a dialectical understanding of Moore‘s writing undoubtedly
enhances our reading of Watchmen. Watchmen re–assembles the
superhero story as a site of bibliophilic loss for the supposed innocent
glories of the Golden and Silver Ages, coupled with an
acknowledgement that as a textual object it has itself profoundly altered
the comics archive. The critical transformation effected by Watchmen
was ultimately part of a re–evaluation of cultural values that saw comics
renamed and remarketed as graphic novels in the 1980s (Sabin 87). The
serial collection was itself transformed into a material unified whole
PEER ENGLISH
29
thereby transforming archive into archival object. But in the final
analysis, closure, and the complete unification of textual integrity and
teleological framing the term implies, is in some sense resisted. The final
chapter dispenses with a prose supplement, ending instead with the shot
of Rorschach‘s journal waiting to be picked up in the news office, and to
be opened leading the reader straight back to the opening page. This
circularity is an attempt to circumvent teleological closure by
encouraging active re–reading. As Thomson suggests: ‗Watchmen was
written to be reread; indeed it can only be read by being reread‘ (103). In
this spirit of anti–teleological circularity, it is worth returning to the
epigraph by Borges that prefaced this reading, which might have been
written with Moore and Watchmen in mind.
NOTES
1 All references show chapter then page number as reprinted in the
graphic novel edition. Supplemental inserts contain no consecutive
pagination.
2 As is now convention, I follow Scott McCloud (4) in my use of the
term ‗comics‘ as singular noun to describe the medium.
3
Jameson marks a distinction between form and content, finding
degraded instances of the latter in postmodernism, whilst acknowledging
that ‗I am, myself, absolutely incapable of guessing or imagining its
form‘ (286). Comics arguably represent a potential form. See also
Jameson, Postmodernism 52–54.
4 See McCloud 70–74 for a Barthesian model of how visual narrative
transitions work. Coincidentally, McCloud‘s chapter on closure is titled
‗Blood in the Gutter‘ (60–93), the gutter here referring to the gap
between the panels.
5 Alemán is referring to Benjamin‘s essay ‗On some motifs in
Baudelaire‘: ‗[Benjamin] argued that the new technologies of
representation (particularly film) instilled in the masses new modes of
filtering their sensations, of preparing their cognitive faculties for the
repeated shocks of a historical period that represented a turning point in
history‘ (Alemán para. 4). Benjamin was writing about the growth of
fascism in the thirties, a philosophy that found its contemporary
figurative parallel in the superhero comics being produced in the USA.
6 This episode invokes, coincidentally, Benjamin‘s ‗Little History of
Photography‘: ‗No matter how artful the photographer, no matter how
carefully posed the subject, the beholder feels an irresistible urge to
search such a picture for the tiny spark of contingency, of the here and 
PEER ENGLISH
30
now, with which reality has (so to speak) seared the subject, to find the
inconspicuous spot wherein the immediacy of that long–forgotten
moment the future nests so eloquently that we, looking back, may
rediscover it‘ (510). Manhattan is both subject and beholder.
7 Comic books (as opposed to strips) were first published in the USA in
this period, collecting previously published strips in pamphlet form.
From here, it was a short step to first adapting prose material (such as
Edgar Rice Burrough‘s Tarzan of the Apes) to original material that
copied the pulp trend for masked crimefighters like The Shadow.
WORKS CITED
Alemán, Alvaro. ‗Paraliterary Immersion and the Puzzleform: An Essay
in Social Restitution‘. ImageText 2.1 (2006): n. pag. 6 Feb. 2008.
<http://www.english.ufl.edu/imagetext/archives/v2_1/aleman/>
Beeck, Nathalie op de. ‗Found Objects (Jem Cohen, Ben Katchor,
Walter Benjamin)‘. MFS Modern Fiction Studies 52.4 (2006):
807–31.
Benjamin, Walter. Illuminations. Ed. Hannah Arendt. Trans. Harry
Zohn. New York: Schocken, 1969.
———. ‗Theses on the Philosophy of History‘. Illuminations. 245–55.
———. ‗Little History of Photography‘. Selected Writings: 1927–1934.
Vol. 3 Ed. Michael W. Jennings, Howard Eiland and Gary Smith.
Trans. Rodney Livingstone et al. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1999. 508–27.
Borges, Jean Luis. ‗Kafka and His Precursors‘. Labyrinths: Selected
Stories and Other Writings. Ed. Donald A Yates and James E.
Irby. Trans. James E. Irby. London: Penguin, 1970. 234–36.
Broderick, Damien. Reading by Starlight: Postmodern Science Fiction.
London: Routledge, 1995.
Carney, Sean. ‗The Tides of History: Alan Moore‘s Historiographic
Vision‘. ImageText 2.2 (2006): n. pag. 28 Dec. 2007.
<http://www.ufl.edu/imagetext/archives/v2_2/index.shtnl>
Dittmer, Jason. ‗The Tyranny of the Serial: Popular Geopolitics, the
Nation, and the Comic Book Discourse‘. Antipode 39 (2007):
247–68.
Duncan, Andy. ‗Alternate History‘. The Cambridge Companion to
Science Fiction. Ed. Edward James and Farah Mendlesohn.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003: 209–19. 
PEER ENGLISH
31
Eco, Umberto. ‗The Myth of Superman‘. The Role of the Reader:
Explorations in the Semiotics of Texts. Trans. William Weaver.
London: Hutchinson, 1979: 107–24.
Gardner, Jared. ‗Archives, Collectors, and the New Media Work of
Comics‘. MFS Modern Fiction Studies 52.4 (2006): 787–806.
Hobsbawm, Eric. Age of Extremes: The Short Twentieth Century 1914–
1991. London: Penguin, 1994.
Jameson, Fredric. ‗Cognitive Mapping‘. The Jameson Reader. Ed.
Michael Hardt and Kathi Weeks. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2000.
277–87.
———. Postmodernism or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism
(London: Verso, 1991.
Jennings, Michael W. Dialectical Images: Walter Benjamin’s Theory of
Literary Criticism. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1987.
Khoury George et al. The Extraordinary Works of Alan Moore. Raleigh,
North Carolina: TwoMorrows Publishing 2003.
McCloud, Scott. Understanding Comics: The Invisible Art. New York:
HarperCollins, 1993.
Moore, Alan and Dave Gibbons. Watchmen. New York: DC Comics,
1987.
Moretti, Franco. Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for Literary
History. London: Verso, 2005.
Nyberg, Amy Kiste. Seal of Approval: The History of the Comics Code.
Jackson: University of Mississippi Press, 1998.
Prager, Brad. ‗Modernism in the Contemporary Graphic Novel: Chris
Ware and the Age of Mechanical Reproduction‘. International
Journal of Comic Art 5.1 (2003): 195–211.
Reynolds, Richard. Superheroes: A Modern Mythology. Jackson:
University of Mississippi Press, 1992.
Sabin, Roger. Adult Comics: An Introduction. London and New York:
Routledge, 1993.
Scaggs, John. Crime Fiction. New York: Routledge, 2005.
Thomson, Iain. ‗Deconstructing the Hero‘. Comics as Philosophy.
Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2005: 100–29.
